An Introduction Into Retirement Accounts
========================================

## IRAs, 401(k)s, and HSAs

##### Last modified: 9-28-2025

When looking into personal finance for the first time, I found it stupidly
difficult to find concrete information about retirement accounts. This article
aims to provide a starting point about the different sorts of retirement
accounts, as well as mention basic retirement account strategies. Note that I'm
not a financial advisor, and that all information here should be double-checked.

### When should you have retirement accounts?

Not everyone should have retirement accounts. However, you should if:

* You plan on retiring.
* You have any extra income that you're comfortable with investing.

The second point is the harder one, and should only generally be considered
after you build an emergency fund (some money that's easily accessible). People
typically recommend three to six months of living expenses as an adequate
emergency fund, although this number depends on your living/financial situation.

But if you can afford to invest your money, you probably should. If the
alternative is leaving that money in a checking account because it's "safer",
remember that inflation eats roughly 2-3% of it every year. Something you can do
instead is invest that money, which across many years will have yields that
significantly beat inflation. Retirement accounts are a good way to invest money
as they're more tax efficient than a normal brokerage account. As such, the
primary goal of retirement account strategy is figuring out how to invest in a
way that minimizes taxes.

### Roth IRA

#### What is a Roth IRA?

If you know nothing about retirement accounts, a Roth IRA is the easiest place
to start. How the Roth IRA works is that you contribute after-tax funds. That
money is invested, and once you turn 59½ years old, the earnings can be taken
out tax-free and penalty-free.

Compare this to a regular brokerage account, where you contribute after-tax
funds, and any realized gains (gains from investments) are taxed.

<img src="/images/retirement-accounts-intro/roth-vs-brokerage.png" alt="Roth vs Brokerage" style="max-width:100%; height:auto;">

There's a few other important details about the Roth IRA:

* Contributions can go up to the annual limit or your taxable compensation for
  the year, whichever is less. As of
  [2025](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/plan-participant-employee/retirement-topics-ira-contribution-limits),
  the annual limit is $7,000 ($8,000 if at least age 50).
* Contributions can be withdrawn at any time tax-free and penalty-free.
  Withdrawn contributions still count for the yearly contribution limit.
* Earnings can be withdrawn tax-free and penalty-free so long as you're under
  the age of 59½ and the account has been open for at least 5 years. Attempting
  to withdraw earnings under the required age limit leads to an early withdrawal
  fee of 10% as well.
* If your Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) is too high, you're ineligible
  to directly contribute (there are ways to bypass this which will be discussed
  later).


 This is probably the easiest place to start investing. It's with after-tax
 funds, which means that there's no extra tax complications. The bar for
 eligibility is low too—as long as you have taxable compensation and are under
 the MAGI limit, you're eligible to contribute.

#### Creating a Roth IRA

A Roth IRA can be set up through a brokerage provider. Here's some possible
options:

* Fidelity
* Vanguard
* Charles Schwab
* Robinhood
  * <small>This is only here due to their [3% IRA
    match](https://robinhood.com/us/en/about/retirement/). The catch is that
    it's
    [Robinhood](https://www.reddit.com/r/stocks/comments/qiauqm/comment/hii89tn/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web3x&utm_name=web3xcss&utm_term=1&utm_content=share_button).</small>


People seem to spend too much time on this decision. The bottom line is that it
doesn't matter. There's hardly any differences between the providers other than
their interface and marginal differences in what you can invest in with them.
Plus, you always have the option to switch to a different provider later.

#### Roth IRA Investment Strategies

Once you put money into a Roth IRA, the next (easily forgettable) step is
figuring out what to invest the money in. People typically recommend buying
index funds, which is effectively a collection of multiple stocks. The current
popular option is the S&P 500, an index fund that tracks the top 500 companies
in the US. I shouldn't offer any more advice past this, so here's a few links
that may help with decision-making:

* [Fidelity Investing ideas for your IRA](https://www.fidelity.com/viewpoints/retirement/ira-portfolio)
* [Bogleheads Asset allocation](https://www.bogleheads.org/wiki/Asset_allocation)
* [Youtube video by The Money Guy Show](https://youtu.be/MIZKkeCglvs?si=OYFl2x6wJeqX_4ha)

The TL;DR is that what you choose to invest in should depend on your age and
risk tolerance.

Similar to above, this isn't something worth spending very long dwelling on. In
the Roth IRA, you can freely change investment positions without taxes or
penalties. On the other hand, you should refrain from changing positions too
much, if these changes are a result of current market trajectory. The ideal
scenario is to find a strategy that works for you, and then stick with it no
matter what's currently happening in the market.

### Traditional IRA

#### What is a Traditional IRA?

There's a number of differences between a Traditional IRA and Roth IRA. For
simplicity, I only focus on one difference here, which is how they're taxed
differently. Trad IRA contributions are pre-tax, meaning that they're deductible
from your income. Any growth is tax-deferred, meaning that it's only when you
withdraw any funds that those funds are taxed as income. 

<img src="/images/retirement-accounts-intro/roth-vs-trad.png" alt="Roth vs Traditional" style="max-width:100%; height:auto;">

Otherwise, the Trad IRA and Roth IRA are similar:

* Both have the contribution limit of $7,000. Note that this limit is shared
  across the IRAs.
* Both have an early withdrawal penalty. One difference is that in the Trad IRA,
  contributions cannot be withdrawn early penalty-free (barring
  [exceptions](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/plan-participant-employee/retirement-topics-exceptions-to-tax-on-early-distributions)).

I claimed earlier that Trad IRA contributions are pre-tax. Unfortunately, this
is not true if you have a retirement plan at work and if your MAGI is at least a
certain amount. The limits for 2024 are defined
[here](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/plan-participant-employee/2024-ira-contribution-and-deduction-limits-effect-of-modified-agi-on-deductible-contributions-if-you-are-covered-by-a-retirement-plan-at-work).
If your Trad IRA contributions are nondeductible (meaning not deductible from
your income), you should always prefer contributing to a Roth IRA instead.

#### Backdoor Roth IRA

Earlier, I mentioned that the Roth IRA prevents people with high income to
directly contribute. The limits for 2024 are explained
[here](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/plan-participant-employee/amount-of-roth-ira-contributions-that-you-can-make-for-2024).
What you can do instead is contribute those funds to a Trad IRA, and then
immediately rollover those funds into a Roth IRA. This is known as the "backdoor
Roth IRA", and it's called a backdoor as it's a legal loophole.

If this is the first time you've heard of this, it probably sounds really
stupid. It is stupid. Doing this backdoor method yields the exact same result as
a direct contribution. The process is also easy enough to where most brokerage
providers will handhold you through the process.

One caveat is that filing taxes becomes [marginally
harder](https://ttlc.intuit.com/turbotax-support/en-us/help-article/retirement-benefits/enter-backdoor-roth-ira-conversion/L7gGPjKVY_US_en_US).
Also, if you do a backdoor, you should make sure that your trad IRA is initially
empty. This is due to the [pro-rata
rule](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/rollovers-of-after-tax-contributions-in-retirement-plans)
(which isn't worth explaining here). It's still a very simple process, so it's
an option to definitely consider if your income is too high for direct Roth IRA
contributions. 

### 401(k)

#### What is a 401(k)?

Some employers offer a 401(k), a retirement account, to employees. What
employees can do is take a portion of their paycheck and contribute that
directly to their 401(k). The annual contribution limit for employees is
$23,500, as of
[2025](https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/401k-limit-increases-to-23500-for-2025-ira-limit-remains-7000).

#### Types of 401(k)s

Employees can choose one of two types of the 401(k), that being either the Roth
401(k) or Traditional 401(k). These types should look similar, because they're
the same types of accounts for IRAs. Tax-wise, they behave basically the same
way:

* For the Roth 401(k), after-tax funds go into the account. That money is then
  be withdrawn later tax-free.
* For the Traditional 401(k), funds go in pre-tax. That money is taxed as income
  when withdrawn.

One difference between the 401(k) and IRA is that because the 401(k) is supplied
by the employer, your investment options in the accounts will probably look
different. If your plan is to invest in index funds, this ultimately shouldn't
matter too much to you.

#### Employer Match

Some employers offers a matching contribution. The type of match depends heavily
on the employer, but the usual format is based on how much you personally
contribute and your salary. One example might look like "50% of employee's
contributions up to 6% of salary". 

One thing to note is that the employee contribution limit does not include your
employer's match. There's a separate limit for the employer + employee total
contribution, that being $70,000 as of
[2025](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/cola-increases-for-dollar-limitations-on-benefits-and-contributions).
So you don't need to worry about "maxing" out your employer match, or doing math
to hit exactly the employee contribution limit number.

The takeaway is that if your employer has a contribution match, this is the first
priority for retirement account contributions. This is essentially free money
that your employer is giving you, so you should be trying to maximize their
match. 

### Health Savings Account (HSA)

#### What is a HSA?

An HSA is another savings account, this one moreso used for medical expenses.
You can only have an HSA if you are enrolled in a High-Deductible Health Plan
(HDHP), which may be offered by an employer or enrolled in individually. Just
like the other accounts here, HSA funds can be invested.

How the taxes work for the HSA is that you contribute pre-tax funds to it. At
any point, you can withdraw funds for qualified medical expenses tax-free. If
the withdrawn funds aren't for medical expenses, then you pay the capital gains
tax on withdrawals if at least age 59½. Otherwise, you also pay the early
withdrawal fee.

<img src="/images/retirement-accounts-intro/hsa.png" alt="HSA" style="max-width:90%; height:auto;">

This technically means that the HSA is the best retirement account (barring
[certain states](https://hsaforamerica.com/state-income-tax/)). If you only
use it for non-medical expenses, it matches the strength of a Traditional
account. However, you should expect to have significant medical expenses during
retirement, which makes this account very valuable.

#### Reimbursing Payments

When paying for medical expenses with an HSA, there's two main ways to go about
it. The first way is to have expenses directly pulled from your HSA account when
the purchase is made. The other way is to pay out-of-pocket, then reimburse the
purchase using your HSA at a much later date.

Optimally, the reimbursing payments option is better due to compound interest
(assuming you can afford to pay out-of-pocket). However, in order to reimbuse
the payment, you also need to keep track of some proof of purchase, in case
you're ever audited by the IRS. What this effectively means is keeping track of
dozens of receipts across many years. Whether the extra HSA funds is worth the
effort is up to you.

#### US Health Plans

If you aren't yet enrolled in a health plan, you may be considering enrolling in
a HDHP for access to an HSA. Unfortunately, the US health system is its own
headache to learn about. If you don't know about terms like deductibles or
coinsurance, then you should learn about that before enrolling in a health plan.
This information is outside the scope of this post, but here's a couple of
resources about this:

* [UnitedHealthcare](https://www.uhc.com/understanding-health-insurance/understanding-health-insurance-costs/types-of-health-insurance-costs)
* [A fun, informative Youtube video by brian david
  gilbert](https://youtu.be/-wpHszfnJns?si=4bFncXgX-8xLfATO)

The point of mentioning this is that since HDHPs have a high deductible, it
may not be worth it for people with major medical expenses.

### Choosing Roth vs Traditional

One question that you might've thought of while reading this is wondering
whether to choose to pick a Roth or Traditional retirement account.
Unfortunately, this is a question that's really hard to answer. This decision
depends on factors such as:

* When you plan on retiring
* How much income you'll need during retirement
* What tax brackets will look like in the future (an impossible problem to
  solve)
* How you plan on dealing with [required minimum
  distributions](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/retirement-plan-and-ira-required-minimum-distributions-faqs)
  (not worth explaining here)

Ultimately, this should be a discussion with a financial advisor. However, I
explain here some basic strategies which are probably good enough for most
people just starting to contribute to retirement accounts.

The naive strategy that most people use is that they roughly estimate how much
taxable income they expect to have in retirement. Then, if they're currently
making more than that amount, they choose Traditional. Otherwise, they choose
Roth. The justification here is that taxes should be paid whenever your taxable
income is less, which is honestly good enough for most people.

Also, it'll probably be useful to have both Traditional and Roth funds. The idea
is to mentally separate these into individual "buckets". Then, during
retirement, you can take some funds out of the Traditional bucket within a
certain tax bracket, then supplement that taxable income using your Roth bucket.
As a basic example:

<img src="/images/retirement-accounts-intro/roth-and-trad-buckets.png" alt="Roth and Trad Buckets Example" style="max-width:60%; height:auto;">

Again, choosing between Traditional and Roth is a complicated problem, but the
strategies above provide a good starting point.

### Conclusion

There's a lot more to discuss, but I assume this is sufficient knowledge for
anyone just starting to get into retirement accounts, or investing in general.
As this is targeted for beginners, this post isn't nearly exhaustive of
everything you should know. Nevertheless, I hope this post is useful for anyone
starting out.

### Extra Resources

* [IRS website](https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans)
* [Fidelity Learning Center](https://www.fidelity.com/learning-center/overview)
